docs: ✏️ minor edits to `smoother collaboration` for clarity and readability (#224)
rostools/r-cubed-advanced: sessions/smoother-collaboration.qmd

analysis projects and facilitate smoother collaboration.

## Learning objectives {#sec-smoother-collaboration-learning-objectives}

This session’s **overall learning outcome** is to:

1.  Identify actions to streamline collaboration on a data analysis
    project and create projects that apply many of these actions using
    R.  

**Specific objectives** are to:

1.  Explain what a "project-oriented" workflow is, what a project-level
    R dependency management is, and why these concepts are important for
    collaborative and reproducible analyses.
2.  Describe the difference between workflow dependencies and build
    dependencies, and apply functions in the `{usethis}` R package to
    implement these dependency management concepts.
3.  Explain how following a style guide helps build a common approach to
    reading and writing R code, and thereby improves project-level
    collaboration.
4.  Use `{styler}` and RStudio's canonical markdown mode to
    programmatically check and apply style guides to your project files.

## :speech_balloon: Discussion activity: How do you *exactly* collaborate or contribute to your own or others' projects?

> Time: \~10 minutes.

> Reflect on, when you work on a project (for your thesis or a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reflect on when you work on a project (for your thesis or a
```

I can tell you are a native Dane with the commas :stuck_out_tongue:

manuscript), how **exactly** do you and your collaborators contribute to
the project:

-   Is it mostly verbal contributions?
-   Do you use a shared folder that the files are on?
-   How do you keep track of who's changed what?
-   Do you mostly work on your own with contributions being mostly
    verbal or written feedback (like in a meeting or through an email)?
-   If you collaborate directly on a project, how do you coordinate
    things? Does one collaborator work on one section or analysis, so
    your files are separate?
-   Do you ever have to go in and contribute your own code to theirs

>     (and vice versa)?
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    (and vice versa)?

Consider these questions as we do the following steps.
```

Having an unnumbered list beside a numbered list will look a bit odd when rendered, so just putting some text between to separate them.

Are you using R or some other software for the analysis? Since this is
an R course, we're assuming the software will be R! 😜

The next consideration is determining which packages your project will
depend on to produce the results. When working collaboratively with
others (or even with your future self), you'll need a clear way to track

> to track the project's package dependencies, and, ideally, have a simple

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the project's package dependencies, and, ideally, have a simple
```

and efficient method to install or update them.

Part of the approach covered in this course requires that you follow a
["project-oriented"
workflow](https://www.tidyverse.org/blog/2017/12/workflow-vs-script/)
when working on, well, a project. In order to know how to track your
project's package dependencies, you need to first know, what a "project"
is and how do we work around it. Since the introduction course's first
session on the [Management of R
Projects](https://r-cubed-intro.rostools.org/sessions/project-management.html),
we've consistently taught and used this workflow-style. In fact, it is
embedded into the use of the R Projects via the `.Rproj` files and in
the use of the `{here}` package. So, we're already following a approach,
which will make it easier to track package dependencies of our project.

![Cartoon of combining R Projects with the `{here}` package, compared to

> the common approach of using `setwd()`. The R Project is made of metal,
> and the `{here}` package wears a helmet, appearing secure and robust and
> ready to go skateboarding. Meanwhile `setwd()` is made of glass, covered
> in casts and band-aids, looking much more fragile. [Artwork by
> \@allison_horst.](https://allisonhorst.com/allison-horst)](https://cdn.myportfolio.com/45214904-6a61-4e23-98d6-b140f8654a40/e684ee45-98fc-469e-997c-e2d68b0096cd_rw_1920.png?h=d754f634e6fc1e292430124fbe44dad7)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the common approach of using `setwd()`. [Artwork by
\@allison_horst.](https://allisonhorst.com/allison-horst)](https://cdn.myportfolio.com/45214904-6a61-4e23-98d6-b140f8654a40/e684ee45-98fc-469e-997c-e2d68b0096cd_rw_1920.png?h=d754f634e6fc1e292430124fbe44dad7){fig-alt="The R Project text is made of metal,
and the `{here}` package wears a helmet, appearing secure and robust and
ready to go skateboarding. Meanwhile `setwd()` is made of glass, covered
in casts and band-aids, looking much more fragile."}
```

This should be in the alt-text section.

`data-raw/nmr-omics.R` file already that uses some packages. Let's
assume that your project will be more complex than this and that you
will eventually need some collaborators to contribute who are experts in
for instance metabolomics data processing and in statistical analysis of
high-dimensional data. You know you will end up needing to use other
packages. You also know that you all need some way of tracking which
packages are used so that when others join and contribute to the
project, they can as seamlessly as possible install or update the
packages your data analysis project needs. There are a few ways of
"tracking" package dependencies.

The simplest, but most primitive way is to always make sure to use
`library()` at the top of each R script for each package that the R
script uses. We can call this "*informal*" dependency management.

Let's review the advantages and disadvantages of this form of dependency
management:

-   Advantage:

    -   It's the easiest to conceptually understand and to use.

-   Disadvantages:

    -   It doesn't track project-level dependencies very well, since
        multiple scripts might use the same packages, while some might

>         use different ones This means that you can't easily and quickly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        use different ones. This means that you can't easily and quickly
```

:::: callout-note
## :book: Reading task: \~3 minutes

> The most common form of a more *formal* way of managing dependencies -
> at least based on R packages and projects found on GitHub - makes use of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common form of a more *formal* way of managing dependencies---
at least based on R packages and projects found on GitHub---makes use of
```

the `DESCRIPTION` file and the `usethis::use_package()`. We covered this
style of dependency in the [intermediate
course](https://r-cubed-intermediate.rostools.org/dry-functions.html#continuing-the-workflow).
We will also use this approach during this course, but we'll expand on
it a lot more. We use and recommend it for managing dependencies because
many tools and workflows rely on it, making it well-integrated with R
projects.

Let's take a look on the advantages and disadvantages of this way of
tracking dependencies:

-   Advantages:

    -   Relatively easy to conceptually understand, since you can
        directly view the packages used in the by opening the
        `DESCRIPTION` file and looking at the contents.

    -   Because it is widely used, there are many processes already
        built around making use of tracking dependencies this way. For

>         instance, when creating R package, you need to track package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        instance, when creating an R package, you need to track package
```

        dependencies this way.

    -   Installing packages is as easy as opening the project and
        running `pak::pak()` in the Console, which will install all the
        packages listed in the `DESCRIPTION` file.

    -   Adding packages is as easy as writing
        `usethis::use_package("packagename")` in the Console.

-   Disadvantages:

    -   Like the previous method, it doesn't automatically keep track of
        the versions of the packages you are using. Even though it is
        possible to add a specific version to the `DESCRIPTION` file,
        `{pak}` will install the newest version of the package.

    -   Your project might still rely on a package that is installed on
        *your* computer which influences your project. It could be that
        it isn't obvious as a dependency, so you forget to include it.

>         In other terms, you are still responsible for adding the project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Meaning, you are still responsible for adding the project
```

show the website on the projector).
:::

When you work on a research project that involves data analysis, you'll
likely use packages in two different ways:

1.  Packages that *directly* contribute to data wrangling, analysis,
    plotting, and making the manuscript. These types of packages are
    generally called "build" or "deploy" dependencies. Packages like
    `{dplyr}` or `{tidyr}` are usually **build** dependencies, since you
    use them for processing data.
2.  Packages that *assist* you in doing your work but aren't directly
    used for data analysis. These types of packages would be called
    "workflow" or "development" dependencies. `{usethis}` is usually
    considered a **workflow** dependency.

::: {.callout-tip appearance="default" title="Is this package a build or workflow dependency?"}
A good rule of thumb to determine whether a package is a build or a
workflow dependency is:

-   If you write and use functions from the package within an R script
    that does something to the data or analysis, then it is likely a
    *build* dependency.
-   If you *only* ever use functions from the package in the Console,
    then it is probably a *workflow* dependency.
:::

> So, now we know that the dependencies we added in the exercise, are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, now we know that the dependencies we added in the exercise are
```

> actually build dependencies, before we use them directly in our project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actually build dependencies, since we use them directly in our project
```

to process the data.

> The way you add packages to the `DESCRIPTION` file is sligthly different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way you add packages to the `DESCRIPTION` file is slightly different
```

depending on what type of dependency it is. For build dependencies, we
use the function we've already used before:
`usethis::use_package("packagename")`. For workflow dependencies, it's

> the same function with a small twist Our first workflow dependency is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same function with a small twist. Our first workflow dependency is
```

`{usethis}`, which we will use many times throughout the course.

But before we get into adding `{usethis}` to the `DESCRIPTION` file,

> let's tweak our `.Rprofile` to make our lives a bit easier. We'' add a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let's tweak our personal (also called the global) `.Rprofile` to make our lives a bit easier. We'll add a
```

git_ci("DESCRIPTION", "Add usethis as a suggests dependency.")
```

::: {.callout-tip appearance="default"}

> If you open the help file for `use_package` you'll see that the second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you open the help file for `use_package()` you'll see that the second
```

> 

Author: Not sure what "second part of the tip" the instructor note above refers to? Maybe it should be removed?

Reviewer: I'll look at it.

::: {.callout-tip appearance="default"}
When you come back to a project after a few months or if you start

> collaborating on a project, you can run `pak::pak()` to installs all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collaborating on a project, you can run `pak::pak()` to install all
```

> types of dependencies, both workflow and build. Neat!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
types of dependencies, both workflow and build. Neat! :tada: 
```

about anyone seeing your code, there's a natural temptation to write
your code like you might write notes to yourself: scribbled and scrawled
down quickly.

But when working with others, how it looks can greatly impact how
quickly and easily others are able to read and interpret your code.
Multiply all the collaborators on a project with this natural temptation
for quick (and potentially sloppy) coding, you can imagine how easy it
is for code to massively "drift" towards being poorly formatted,
especially when deadlines are approaching.

That's when "linters" or "stylers" (types of static code analysis tools)
become very useful. They scan your code for common mistakes or syntax
issues, either listing them for you to fix or automatically fixing them
for you. Linters are especially useful when collaborating with someone
who is less experienced with coding or who contribute occasionally to
assist in the code being consistently formatted across the project.

To ensure consistent styling without needing to run checks manually,
*automatic* linting/styling can be a great solution. That's where the
`{styler}` package comes in!

> 

Author: Should there be an actual task within a reading? I.e., adding a package to `DESCRIPTION`?

Reviewer: Good point. I'll make an issue to convert it to an exercise

```

> The thing to note, though, is that `{styler}` isn't perfect, so you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I see what you were asking about reformat vs style. Yea, this section is a bit confusing, so we just remove it.

> might sometimes have to manually run the reformatting (with the Command
> Palette {{< var keybind.palette >}} then "style active file").
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

::: {.callout-tip appearance="default"}

> You might be used to using 4 spaces for tabs instead of 2. The tidyverse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might be used to using 4 spaces for tabs instead of 2. The `{tidyverse}`
```

But what about for Markdown files? While there isn't a package or
function (yet) that styles the Markdown files, RStudio does have an
option in their Tools to format Markdown into a "canonical form". The
reason for this option is because they've added a "visual editor mode"

> to writing R Markdown files (which is great if you are more comfortable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to writing R Markdown / Quarto files (which is great if you are more comfortable
```

-   This isn't a list, why not?
```

Since this mode is on automatically now, as we work in the
`doc/learning.qmd` file through the sessions, we'll get lots of
experience using it.

## :technologist: Exercise: Update the README file while using canonical Markdown mode

> Time: \~10 minutes.

Open up the `README.md` file and start completing the `TODO` items. Save

> often and watch as the Markdown gets reformatted.

Author: Maybe add some instructions on what *exactly* they should add?

-   This isn't a list, why not?
```

Since this mode is on automatically now, as we work in the
`doc/learning.qmd` file through the sessions, we'll get lots of
experience using it.

## :technologist: Exercise: Update the README file while using canonical Markdown mode

> Time: \~10 minutes.

> Open up the `README.md` file and start completing the `TODO` items. Save

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open up the `README.md` file and do all the `TODO` items found inside the file as well as inside the `TODO.md` file. Save
```
